README.md, before:

# Semantic Forms

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/semantic-forms.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/semantic-forms)

A pattern library of forms based on semantic HTML enhanced with a modern UX.

See a [live demo here](https://kethinov.github.io/semanticforms/semanticForms.html).

# Usage

Include the `semanticForms.css` and `semanticForms.js` files from this repo into your project.

If you want to set your own images for the clear fields and dropdown arrows, then include the `semanticFormsNoImages.css` and `semanticForms.js` files from this repo into your project instead, as they do not have any preset images embedded in the CSS and will result in a smaller dependency size.

Apply the `semanticForms` class to your `<form>` elements:

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <!-- your form here -->
</form>
```

Then the CSS/JS enhancements to your forms will apply automatically.

If you add new forms to the DOM after the initial initialization, you can call the global `semanticForms` function to initialize new forms that have been added to the DOM since the initial initialization.

See `semanticForms.html` or the [live demo](https://kethinov.github.io/semanticforms/semanticForms.html) for a complete pattern library with examples of all UI patterns.

# Features

Overview of pattern library features:

## Float label inputs

The float label input pattern is notoriously difficult to implement in a fashion that doesn't degrade HTML semantics or accessibility. This pattern library implements a solution that solves that problem. Your label doesn't need to be a sibling of your input like with other implementations. This implementation also has a custom clear field driven by SVG embedded in the CSS.

### Example

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label for="name">Name</label></dt>
    <dd><input id="name" name="name" type="text" placeholder="e.g. John Smith"></dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

### Or with a `<textarea>`

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label for="textarea">Textarea</label></dt>
    <dd><textarea id="textarea" name="textarea" rows="5" cols="50" placeholder="e.g. Long string of text"></textarea></dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

If you would like to manipulate the size of the area on the input field reserved for the click event of the clear field, apply one or both of the following `data-` attributes to your form.

If you want to double the width of the input field (on screens with the extra space), add a `x2` class to the `dd` element.

Adjust the horizontal offset of the clear field's click event click area (the default is 21):

```html
<form class="semanticForms" data-clearfield-horizontal-offset="21">
  <!-- your form here -->
</form>
```

Adjust the vertical offset of the clear field's click event click area (the default is 5):

```html
<form class="semanticForms" data-clearfield-vertical-offset="5">
  <!-- your form here -->
</form>
```

## Button groups

You can align buttons side-by-side, or in left/right/center groups.

### Non-grouped example

Nothing fancy here:

```html
<button type="submit" name="submit">Non-grouped submit button</button>
<button type="submit" name="submit">Another one</button>
```

### Button groups

Driven by flexbox to intelligently align the buttons based on how many are in the group:

```html
<!-- aligns left/right -->
<menu>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 1</button></li>
  <button type="submit" name="submit">Button 2</button></li>
</menu>

<!-- aligns left/center/right -->
<menu>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 1</button></li>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 2</button></li>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 3</button></li>
</menu>
```

## Checkboxes and radio buttons

Checkboxes and radio buttons need to follow the following markup structure:

### A single checkbox

Not too different than other inputs:

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label for="checkbox">Single checkbox</label></dt>
    <dd><input id="checkbox" name="checkbox" type="checkbox"></dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

### Checkbox group

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label data-for="some_field_name">Checkboxes:</label></dt>
    <dd class="checkboxes">
      <ul id="some_field_name">
        <li><input type="checkbox" name="some_field_name" id="c_one"> <label for="c_one">One</label></li>
        <li><input type="checkbox" name="some_field_name" id="c_two"> <label for="c_two">Two</label></li>
        <li><input type="checkbox" name="some_field_name" id="c_three"> <label for="c_three">Three</label></li>
      </ul>
    </dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```
### Radio buttons

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label data-for="some_field_name">Radios:</label></dt>
    <dd class="radios">
      <ul id="some_field_name">
        <li><input type="radio" name="some_field_name" id="r_one"> <label for="r_one">One</label></li>
        <li><input type="radio" name="some_field_name" id="r_two"> <label for="r_two">Two</label></li>
        <li><input type="radio" name="some_field_name" id="r_three"> <label for="r_three">Three</label></li>
      </ul>
    </dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

## Other features

- Custom-styled select boxes with a custom drawn arrow graphic driven by SVG embedded in the CSS.
- Custom-styled submit buttons to match the aesthetic of the custom-styled forms.
- Responsive: on wide screens, the forms split into multiple columns. On smaller screens, they collapse to a single column.
- Low-flow mode that displays on old browsers, JS-disabled browsers, or can be activated manually by adding the `lowFlow` class to your `<form>` element. The low-flow mode reverts the float label pattern to traditional labels and collapses the forms to single column mode, but preserves the other visual design enhancements driven purely by CSS.

See `semanticForms.html` or the [live demo](https://kethinov.github.io/semanticforms/semanticForms.html) for more examples.

# Contributing

- Fork/clone this repo.
- `npm ci`
- Make your changes. If you want to alter the CSS, do the changes in the `.less` files.
- `npm run build`. The build step compiles the LESS file into CSS.
- Test your changes by opening `semanticForms.html` in your browser.
- Commit, push, open pull request.

Commit message:

3.0.5
- Added "reset" versions of the CSS files that set `all: unset;` before applying any semantic forms styles to help avoid conflicts with other CSS. There is a performance degradation to using this technique, so you should only use this if absolutely necessary.

README.md, after:

# Semantic Forms

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/semantic-forms.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/semantic-forms)

A pattern library of forms based on semantic HTML enhanced with a modern UX.

See a [live demo here](https://kethinov.github.io/semanticforms/semanticForms.html).

# Usage

Include the `semanticForms.css` and `semanticForms.js` files from this repo into your project.

If you want to set your own images for the clear fields and dropdown arrows, then include the `semanticFormsNoImages.css` and `semanticForms.js` files from this repo into your project instead, as they do not have any preset images embedded in the CSS and will result in a smaller dependency size.

If you have CSS inheritance conflicts with other CSS in your webapp, try including the "reset" versions of the semantic forms CSS files (`semanticFormsReset.css` or `semanticFormsNoImagesReset.css`) which set `all: unset;` before applying any semantic-forms styles to help avoid conflicts with other CSS. There is a performance degradation to using this technique, so you should only use this if absolutely necessary.

Then apply the `semanticForms` class to your `<form>` elements:

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <!-- your form here -->
</form>
```

Then the CSS/JS enhancements to your forms will apply automatically.

If you add new forms to the DOM after the initial initialization, you can call the global `semanticForms` function to initialize new forms that have been added to the DOM since the initial initialization.

See `semanticForms.html` or the [live demo](https://kethinov.github.io/semanticforms/semanticForms.html) for a complete pattern library with examples of all UI patterns.

# Features

Overview of pattern library features:

## Float label inputs

The float label input pattern is notoriously difficult to implement in a fashion that doesn't degrade HTML semantics or accessibility. This pattern library implements a solution that solves that problem. Your label doesn't need to be a sibling of your input like with other implementations. This implementation also has a custom clear field driven by SVG embedded in the CSS.

### Example

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label for="name">Name</label></dt>
    <dd><input id="name" name="name" type="text" placeholder="e.g. John Smith"></dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

### Or with a `<textarea>`

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label for="textarea">Textarea</label></dt>
    <dd><textarea id="textarea" name="textarea" rows="5" cols="50" placeholder="e.g. Long string of text"></textarea></dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

If you would like to manipulate the size of the area on the input field reserved for the click event of the clear field, apply one or both of the following `data-` attributes to your form.

If you want to double the width of the input field (on screens with the extra space), add a `x2` class to the `dd` element.

Adjust the horizontal offset of the clear field's click event click area (the default is 21):

```html
<form class="semanticForms" data-clearfield-horizontal-offset="21">
  <!-- your form here -->
</form>
```

Adjust the vertical offset of the clear field's click event click area (the default is 5):

```html
<form class="semanticForms" data-clearfield-vertical-offset="5">
  <!-- your form here -->
</form>
```

## Button groups

You can align buttons side-by-side, or in left/right/center groups.

### Non-grouped example

Nothing fancy here:

```html
<button type="submit" name="submit">Non-grouped submit button</button>
<button type="submit" name="submit">Another one</button>
```

### Button groups

Driven by flexbox to intelligently align the buttons based on how many are in the group:

```html
<!-- aligns left/right -->
<menu>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 1</button></li>
  <button type="submit" name="submit">Button 2</button></li>
</menu>

<!-- aligns left/center/right -->
<menu>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 1</button></li>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 2</button></li>
  <li><button type="submit" name="submit">Button 3</button></li>
</menu>
```

## Checkboxes and radio buttons

Checkboxes and radio buttons need to follow the following markup structure:

### A single checkbox

Not too different than other inputs:

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label for="checkbox">Single checkbox</label></dt>
    <dd><input id="checkbox" name="checkbox" type="checkbox"></dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

### Checkbox group

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label data-for="some_field_name">Checkboxes:</label></dt>
    <dd class="checkboxes">
      <ul id="some_field_name">
        <li><input type="checkbox" name="some_field_name" id="c_one"> <label for="c_one">One</label></li>
        <li><input type="checkbox" name="some_field_name" id="c_two"> <label for="c_two">Two</label></li>
        <li><input type="checkbox" name="some_field_name" id="c_three"> <label for="c_three">Three</label></li>
      </ul>
    </dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```
### Radio buttons

```html
<form class="semanticForms">
  <dl>
    <dt><label data-for="some_field_name">Radios:</label></dt>
    <dd class="radios">
      <ul id="some_field_name">
        <li><input type="radio" name="some_field_name" id="r_one"> <label for="r_one">One</label></li>
        <li><input type="radio" name="some_field_name" id="r_two"> <label for="r_two">Two</label></li>
        <li><input type="radio" name="some_field_name" id="r_three"> <label for="r_three">Three</label></li>
      </ul>
    </dd>
  </dl>
</form>
```

## Other features

- Custom-styled select boxes with a custom drawn arrow graphic driven by SVG embedded in the CSS.
- Custom-styled submit buttons to match the aesthetic of the custom-styled forms.
- Responsive: on wide screens, the forms split into multiple columns. On smaller screens, they collapse to a single column.
- Low-flow mode that displays on old browsers, JS-disabled browsers, or can be activated manually by adding the `lowFlow` class to your `<form>` element. The low-flow mode reverts the float label pattern to traditional labels and collapses the forms to single column mode, but preserves the other visual design enhancements driven purely by CSS.

See `semanticForms.html` or the [live demo](https://kethinov.github.io/semanticforms/semanticForms.html) for more examples.

# Contributing

- Fork/clone this repo.
- `npm ci`
- Make your changes. If you want to alter the CSS, do the changes in the `.less` files.
- `npm run build`. The build step compiles the LESS file into CSS.
- Test your changes by opening `semanticForms.html` in your browser.
- Commit, push, open pull request.
